# Efficacy of the RAPTOR Statistic

The NBA statistic "RAPTOR" stands for **R**obust **A**lgorithm (using) **P**layer **T**racking (and) **O**n/**O**ff **R**atings. This is a plus/minus statistic that measures a player’s point contribution to his team based on offensive and defensive contributions per 100 possessions. There are two major components when calculating a player’s RAPTOR score. The first component is the “box” component which uses a player’s individual statistics. The second component is the “on-off” component which evaluates a team’s performance when the player and combinations of his teammates are on or off the floor. As a descriptive statistic, RAPTOR is calculated solely based on a player’s on-court performance and the performance of the player’s teammates.

The research question to answer is "What effect do different categories of statistics have on NBA's newly implemented RAPTOR score." We decided to explore this research question because of the interest in how data analytics works in the sports industry (specifically the NBA) and to analyze the NBA with a statistical business perspective rather than an entertainment perspective. Python was used to read and merge the datasets from _NBAStuffer_ and _FiveThirtyEight_, clean the data (missing values, outliers, dropping and renaming columns), visualize, transform, scale the data, and create linear regression models. 

The results showed that advanced statistics does the best at predicting the RAPTOR score, then individual-drive statistics, then team-driven non-scoring statistics, and lastly the box score statistics. According to our models, another finding was that individual-driven statistics are valued more than team-driven non-scoring statistics. 

Initially we made a hypothesis that the team-driven statistics would overshadow the individual-driven statistics because we were attempting to predict the efficacy of the RAPTOR +/- which is how much value a player contributes to the team. It made sense that a player who generates positive outcomes through other teammates would be more beneficial to the team. However, our hypothesis was proven to be wrong. Lastly, seeing that the Box-Score Statistics Model was the worst, it solidified the fact that not everything seen on paper (NBA stat sheets) is directly correlated to an athlete’s value on his/her team. This is seen in many instances in the NBA where some mediocre teams who are on the verge of missing the playoffs have great players with deceiving box-score statistics also known as stat padding. Stat padding is when a player’s statistics are magnified but of little benefit to the team’s chance of winning. For example, Russell Westbrook looked like the best player on paper in 2018. However, he was not the best team player which was proven by their team’s ranking (6), barely leading his team to the playoffs.

The main beneficiaries of this project are sports managers and coaches. General team managers can use the model’s results to see which players to recruit or trade while coaches can see which game strategy to use. For example, team managers would want to sign certain players that are determined to bring the most value to the team. As for coaches, they can decide on a certain style of play or determine which players to give more playing time. Other groups that would benefit include stakeholders and gamblers. Stakeholders and gamblers can use these models to see which team to invest their money in before the season even starts.

#### The full analysis can be found in _RAPTOR Paper.pdf_ and its respective Python code in _NBA RAPTOR Model.ipynb_
#### Other files included are the datasets (.csv)
